>> Did prehistoric man
communicate with non-human
entities?
An exciting new archeological
study of ancient European caves
may have just found an answer.
This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Caves have always been
a source of fascination,
as have the paintings made in
them by the earliest humans.
There's been much debate
among archeologists
over the meaning
of these paintings,
as well as why so many
were made in the deepest,
hardest to reach parts of caves.
A team from Tel Aviv
University set out
in search of the answer.
Archeologist Ran
Barkai led the study,
which focused on caves
painted in Spain and France
some 40,000 years ago.
>> We were wondering about
human relationships with caves.
Caves are not only
shelters from the elements.
We believe that caves
had much more deeper
meaning for early humans.
And the reason why people
entered deep and dark caves
was always on the table.
And even after 100
years of research,
there's no answer for that.
A few years ago a few papers
came out showing evidence
that in decorated
caves in Europe
people were using
torches in order
to light the way in
the cave, and in order
to make these
depictions on the wall.
When we go to the idea that the
use of torches inside the cave
must have had en effect on the
oxygen level in the cave and we
simulated the effect of
the use of artificial light
in deep and dark caves.
>> The researchers' findings
were groundbreaking.
>> And they came to realize that
the use of torches must have
reduced the level of
oxygen inside caves,
which brings a well-known
phenomenon which is called
hypoxia.
And one of the
consequences of hypoxia
is altered states
of consciousness.
You can get hallucinations while
being in a state of hypoxia.
And we came to the idea
that people intentionally
went into deep and dark
caves with artificial light
because they were aware of
the transformative nature
of this oxygen-depleted space.
And we suggested that
this is the reason
they made the depictions
in deep and dark caves.
>> The findings led researchers
to draw some fascinating
conclusions.
>> We believe, and there's a
lot of evidence about that,
both from recent humans,
the caves were conceived
as portals, as gates
to the underworld.
They could see the underworld
as a world of prosperity
or as the place of
origin of all things.
We believe in their
opinion, the end of the cave
was the connection
to the netherworld
and they wanted to get
this connection in order
to communicate and maintain
their relationships
with the entities which are in
the other side of the world.
>> Animals and geometric
signs are the primary subjects
of most of these paintings,
which were executed with
an amazing level of
artistic ability,
especially considering
the time and conditions.
>> While going through altered
state of consciousness,
they saw the animals within
their vision and then they
painted them on the wall.
They didn't go there
to see animals.
They went in order to get
attached to the cosmos
and via that, they saw
things within their vision,
and they put them on the wall.
>> Andrew Collins, an ancient
history researcher and writer
on the significance
of this study.
>> The greatest takeaway, in my
opinion relating to this study,
is not so much the fact that
they come up with this idea,
which is revolutionary
in itself,
but it's the fact that academics
are seriously considering
the idea that we are
communicating with non-human
intelligences, and
these entities,
these beings might
well have been real.
Now we have to
try and understand
exactly what those entities are.
>> For Ran Barkai, there's
an even bigger takeaway.
>> It is my understanding after
spending many years of studying
early humans, I believe that we
can learn the lesson from them.
Their consciousness
was much wider than us.
They were much more
connected to the cosmos.
They realized that their
actions have a price.
And I think they were
much more concerned
about their relationships
with world than we are.
>> While more research is
being planned on the topic,
these findings offer an
extraordinary glimpse
into the consciousness of
our earliest ancestors.
For new perspective,
this is Gaia News.